ENVS 101. Introduction to Environmental Studies I. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Enrollment is restricted to
environmental studies majors. Study of contemporary issues related to
environmental studies including sustainability, biological conservation,
global change and an overview of the core earth systems.
ENVS 102. Introduction to Environmental Studies II. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: ENVS 101 or
permission of instructor. Enrollment is restricted to environmental studies
majors. Studies of contemporary issues related to government policy and
environmental issues at local to international scales.
886 Undergraduate courses
ENVS 105. Physical Geology. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. A descriptive approach to
physical geology dealing with the history and structure of the earth,
catastrophic events and geology as it relates to the contemporary
environment. An optional laboratory, ENVZ 105, may be taken with this
course.
ENVS 201. Earth System Science. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. An introduction to the
processes of and linkages among the major systems that drive planet
Earth. The biosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere and
sociosphere are presented as dynamic and interdependent systems.
ENVS 222. Electronic Portfolios. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 1 lecture hour (delivered online). 1 credit. This online
course will guide individuals in developing an electronic portfolio
consisting of student-curated collections of specific academic work,
bibliographic information and a curriculum vitae used throughout their
academic career. Graded as pass/fail.
ENVS 260. Outdoor Leadership. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course is designed
to provide an introduction to the concepts and skills needed to work
and lead teams in outdoor settings. Topics include the historical and
philosophical foundations of outdoor leadership, outdoor teaching and
facilitation, safety and risk management, and environmental stewardship.
The course includes classroom and field application components.
ENVS 265. Paths to Environmental Leadership. 2 Hours.
Semester course; 2 lecture hours. 2 credits. Prerequisites: ENVS 101
and ENVS 102, both with a minimum grade of B. This course focuses
on personal leadership development, leadership in the field of
environmental studies, grant writing and revision, and the peer-review
process. Discussions with guest speakers who are leaders in various
environmental fields, additional readings and self-directed exploration
of leadership figures will broaden our understanding of environmental
leadership. Students will then use the Udall Undergraduate Scholarship
application as a tool to begin to develop their own vision of environmental
leadership and develop experience in grant writing and peer review.
ENVS 291. Special Topics in Environmental Studies. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated
with different topics for a maximum of 12 credits. An introductory
investigation into a selected topic salient to environmental studies. See
the Schedule of Classes for specific topics being offered each semester.
ENVS 300. Sustainable Societies: James River Basin. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course explores the 25
most critical social, economic and environmental issues in the region
in a global context. It examines how people are tackling the issues of
sustainably and turning them into opportunities.
ENVS 301. Introduction to Meteorology. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. An introductory course
designed to provide the student with an overview of the structures and
processes that cause weather. These include atmospheric circulations
and the weather patterns that we observe. Emphasis will be placed upon
the tracking and display of weather phenomena, as well as their forecast
movement and impact.
ENVS 310. Introduction to Oceanography. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. An introductory course
designed to provide the student with an overview of the structures
and processes of the world's oceans. These include the systems that
impact the oceans: the hydrosphere, the atmosphere, the geosphere,
the biosphere and the sociosphere. Emphasis will be placed upon
hands-on techniques for understanding these systems, including online
simulations and in-class activities.
ENVS 311. Politics of the Environment. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. An exploration of the current
controversy about environmental politics and the issues and crises it
centers on. Special attention will be given to the constitutional, political
and geographical factors in the development of environmental policy and
the organized effort to deal with governmental actions and inaction and
its impact on policy outcomes. Crosslisted as: POLI 311.
ENVS 314. Human-Environment Interactions: Foundations and
Applications. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. A comparative study
of the ecology and natural history of human populations, including
the environments as determining factors in the evolution of human
institutions and technology, resources management, and population
crises; cultural traditions as mechanisms of population control; basic
theory of population biology. Crosslisted as: INTL 314.
ENVS 315. Energy and the Environment. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Enrollment restricted to
non-physics majors with junior or senior standing; not applicable to the
physics major. A study of society's demands for energy, how it is currently
being met, the environmental consequences thereof and some discussion
of alternatives. Crosslisted as: PHYS 315.
ENVS 321. Cartography. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: MATH 131,
STAT 208, or higher level MATH or STAT course. This course provides
an introduction to the art and science behind the presentation of spatial
information using maps and charts. Students will develop visual thinking
and communication skills while applying cartographic theory to address
contemporary practical problems. Students must have a laptop able to
run ArcGIS Online.
ENVS 330. Environmental Pollution. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisites: BIOL 151 and
BIOL 152. The study of pollution in the environment with emphasis on the
procedures for detection and abatement.
ENVS 332. Environmental Management. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: URSP 204. An
interdisciplinary review of domestic and international environmental
problems and their underlying causes, current management frameworks,
alternative management approaches and strategies, and barriers to
their implementation. Other topics include: environmental history and
economics, population growth, natural resources use, biodiversity,
pollution. Crosslisted as: URSP 332.
ENVS 335. Environmental Geology. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: ENVS 105
or URSP 204. The relationship between humankind and the physical
environment, earth materials and processes, geological hazards, water,
mineral and energy resources, land use, and environmental health and
law.
ENVS 343. Data Literacy. 4 Hours.
Semester course; 4 lecture hours. 4 credits. Prerequisites: ENVS 102
and STAT 210. This course takes a hands-on, collaborative approach for
students to develop proficiency in the application of data management
skills, static and dynamic data visualization, and quantitative analyses of
environmental and geospatial datasets. Students will be required to bring
their own laptop and analyses and visualization will be performed using
the R statistical programming language.
ENVS 355. Water. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: BIOL 317 or
ENVS 330 or permission of instructor. The course takes an ecosystem
approach to understanding the functioning of streams, rivers, lakes,
estuaries and oceans. The course complements curricula in biology and
environmental studies and is specifically geared toward students with an
interest in the water resources profession.
ENVS 360. Outdoor Programming and Event Management. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course is designed
to provide students with information and practical experience required
to successfully design, promote, implement and evaluate outdoor
experiential programming across a range of contexts.
ENVS 361. Outdoor Team Building and Group Facilitation. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course is designed
to provide students with the theory and practice of developing and
deploying a successful outdoor recreational, educational, interpretive
or adventure experience. In doing so, students will learn about group
dynamics, team building, risk management and inquiry-based learning
techniques.
ENVS 368. Nature Writing. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: ENGL 201,
ENGL 202, ENGL 203, ENGL 204, ENGL 205, ENGL 206, ENGL 211,
ENGL 215, ENGL 217, ENGL 236, ENGL 250, ENGL 291, ENGL 295 or
NEXT 240. A study of the literary genre of nature writing in English.
Crosslisted as: ENGL 368.
ENVS 370. Applications of Conservation Science. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: ENVS 343.
The field of conservation science is focused on protecting biodiversity
through the promotion of both social and ecological processes. This
course will provide a foundation in the real-world applications of
conservation science and demonstrate how data are essential to
effective conservation of natural resources.
ENVS 391. Special Topics in Environmental Studies. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated with
different topics for a maximum of 12 credits. A detailed investigation into
a selected topic salient to environmental studies. See the Schedule of
Classes for specific topics being offered each semester.
ENVS 401. Meteorology and Climatology. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. Prerequisite: PHYS 201 or PHYS 207.
A basic, semiquantitative course in the elements of weather and climate,
their driving forces and their spatial and temporal distribution and
variability. Atmospheric motions and circulation, weather forecasting,
human impact on weather and climate.
ENVS 411. Oceanography. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisites: BIOL 151,
BIOL 152 and CHEM 102. A basic course in the physical, chemical and
geological properties of oceans and ocean basins. Origin and character of
ocean basins, properties of oceanic waters, oceanic circulation, land-sea
interactions, marine environments and ecology.
VCU Undergraduate Bulletin 2023-24 887
ENVS 421. Environmental Data Visualization. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisite: STAT 314. This
is an introductory course in using databases and geospatial technology.
The course will introduce students to computer technology, project
development and management skills, database management skills, and
geospatial technology. Students will use in-class applied environmental
analyses to guide skill-set development. The course will introduce the
students to working with data in various formats and using the ArcGIS
software suite to visualize the data. Students will be introduced to
Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Access, ESRI ArcGIS software suite and ESRI
ArcGIS Online.
ENVS 430. Invasive Species Management. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 1 lecture and 2 field experience hours. 3 credits.
Prerequisite: BIOL 317. This course explores the ecological, political and
regulatory issues surrounding invasive species in the city of Richmond
and the commonwealth of Virginia. Students will be introduced to the
James River Park System habitat restoration plan, a long-term strategy
to manage non-native invasive species. Individuals will work directly with
environmental professionals, park personnel and community partners to
restore natural areas.
ENVS 460. Wilderness First Responder. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. This course is intended
for anyone working in a position of leadership in an outdoor setting
or for individuals who want a high level of wilderness medical training
for working in remote field settings, extended personal backcountry
trips or expeditions. The course is a comprehensive and in-depth look
at the standards and skills of dealing with response and assessment,
musculoskeletal injuries, environmental emergencies and survival skills,
soft tissue injuries, and medical emergencies. Additional topics, such
as CPR, are also included. Wilderness First Responder training is the
industry standard for those who work as government and nongovernment
field technicians, backcountry trip leaders, camp counselors, mountain
guides, river guides and ski patrollers.
ENVS 461. Wilderness Policy and Practice. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 2 lecture and 1 field experience hours. 3 credits. This
course takes a multidisciplinary and experiential look at the concept of
wilderness. Learning spans from the classroom to a first-hand wilderness
experience, and materials include environmental law, natural resources
management, environmental philosophy and ethics, regional and local
history, and conservation science. Throughout students will focus on the
intersection between society, biodiversity and the wilderness concept in
principle and practice.
ENVS 490. Research Seminar in Environmental Studies. 3 Hours.
Semester course; 3 lecture hours. 3 credits. Prerequisites: senior
standing and at least 12 hours of approved environmental studies course
work. An interdisciplinary examination of problems and issues central
to environmental studies. Environmental research of VCU faculty will
be reviewed, and selected local environmental problems will be studied.
Each student will complete a research project focusing on a specific
environmental question.
ENVS 491. Topics in Environmental Studies. 1-4 Hours.
Semester course; 1-4 lecture hours. 1-4 credits. May be repeated with
different topics for a maximum of 12 credits. An in-depth study of a
selected environmental topic. See the Schedule of Classes for specific
topics to be offered each semester and prerequisites.
ENVS 492. Independent Study. 1-3 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. Variable credit. Maximum of 3 credits
per semester; maximum total of 6 credits for all topics courses.
Prerequisite: junior or senior standing, and permission of instructor.
888 Undergraduate courses
ENVS 493. Environmental Studies Internship. 1-3 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. 1-3 credits per semester. Maximum total
of 6 credits. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing, and permission of
instructor. Graded as pass/fail.
ENVS 499. Environmental Studies Capstone Experience. 0 Hours.
Semester course; variable hours. 0 credits. Corequisite: ENVS 490,
ENVS 491 (when topics implement core competencies required for a
capstone experience and are approved by the director of the Center for
Environmental Studies), ENVS 492 or ENVS 493. Enrollment restricted to
students who have completed 90 hours of undergraduate course work.
Any of the corequisite courses qualify as a capstone experience if taken
with this course. Graded as pass/fail.
ENVZ 105. Physical Geology Laboratory. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 2 laboratory hours. 1 credit. Pre- or corequisite:
ENVS 105, an optional laboratory course consisting of experiments and
activities related to ENVS 105.
ENVZ 335. Environmental Geology Laboratory. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 2 laboratory hours. 1 credit. Corequisite: ENVS 335.
Required for environmental science majors enrolled in ENVS 335; optional
for other majors. Attendance on one Saturday morning field trip required.
Laboratory exercises coordinated with ENVS 335 lectures.
ENVZ 401. Meteorology and Climatology Laboratory. 1 Hour.
Semester course; 3 laboratory hours. 1 credit. Pre- or corequisite:
ENVS 401. A series of laboratory and field experiments designed to
quantify the elements of weather and climate and to interpret their local
temporal and spatial variations.